HIF API documentation (#1)
MathisMARION/wisun-br-linux: HIF.md

# RCP Hardware Interface

This document describes the Hardware InterFace (HIF). HIF is the API between
`wsbrd` and the RCP device.

## General observations

In this specification, the prefix used in the command means:
  - `REQ` (request): a command sent by host to the device
  - `SET`: special case of `REQ` to configure the device
  - `CNF` (confirmation): a reply from the device to the host
  - `IND` (indication): a spontaneous frame from the device to the host

All the types used are little endian.

The type `bool` is a `uint8_t`, but only the LSB is interpreted. All the other
bits are reserved.

When a bit is reserved or unassigned, it be set to 0 by the transmitter and must
be ignored by the receiver.

All the version numbers are encoded using `uint32_t` with the following mask:
  - `0xFF000000` Major revision
  - `0x00FFFF00` Minor revision
  - `0x000000FF` Patch

All timestamps used are in the RCP timebase and in microseconds, with origin
the device reset.

All channel numbers are defined as if there were no channel mask applied
(_ChanN = Chan0 + n * ChanSpacing_).

## Frame structure

The RCP can use the _Native UART_ or the _CPC_ protocol. With CPC, the frame

> structure is defined by the CPC specification.

Reviewer: Link to CPC?

With Native UART, frames use the following structure, and use a CRC-16 for
error detection.

 - `uint16_t len`  
    Length of `payload`. Only the 11 least significant bits (`0x07FF`) are
    used. The 5 most significant bits (`0xF800`) must ignored.

 - `uint16_t hcs`  
    [CRC-16/MCRF4XX][hcs] of the `len` field.

 - `uint8_t payload[]`  
    Frame payload.

 - `uint16_t fcs`  
    [CRC-A][fcs] of the `payload` field.

> With both protocols, the frame payload is in the following form:

Reviewer: `Regardless of the protocol used, the frame payload always has the following structure:`

Feel free to disregard my comments (or not) when they are subjective like that.

 - `uint8_t cmd`  
   Command number.

 - `uint8_t body[]`  
   Command body.

[hcs]: https://reveng.sourceforge.io/crc-catalogue/16.htm#crc.cat.crc-16-mcrf4xx
[fcs]: https://reveng.sourceforge.io/crc-catalogue/16.htm#crc.cat.crc-16-iso-iec-14443-3-a

## Administrative commands

### `0x01 REQ_NOP`

No-operation. Can be used to synchronize UART communication.

 - `uint8_t garbage[]`  
    Data after command is ignored.

### `0x02 IND_NOP`

No-operation. Can be used to synchronize UART communication.

 - `uint8_t garbage[]`  

>     Extra data may be included. Must be ignored.

Reviewer: Either `Extra data may be included. Must be ignored.`, either `Data after command is ignored.`, no?

### `0x03 REQ_RESET`

Hard reset the RCP. After this command, the host will receive `IND_RESET`.

 - `bool enter_bootloader`  
    If set, start the bootloader instead of normal firmware. Set this field if
    you want to flash a new firmware. Refer to the bootloader documentation to
    know how to send the new firmware (usually, the XMODEM protocol is used to

>     send the new firmware other the UART).

Reviewer: I don't think `other` is the right word here.

Maybe stopping at `new firmware` and linking the documentation is better?

### `0x04 IND_RESET`

Sent on boot of the RCP. This command may be caused by a power on, `REQ_RESET`,
a debugger, etc...

 - `uint32_t api_version`  
    Device API version

 - `uint32_t fw_version`  
    Device version

>  - `char fw_version_str[]`  

Reviewer: Should we mention that the string is null terminated?

    Device version string. It may include version annotation (ie.
    `1.5.0-5-ga91c352~bpo`).

 - `uint8_t hw_eui64[8]`  
    EUI64 flashed in the device

 - `uint8_t reserved[]`  
    Extra data may be included. For backward compatibility, they must be
    ignored.

### `0x05 IND_FATAL`

Commands don't reply in case of success. If the device gets misconfigured or if
any other fatal error happens, the device will reset. In this case, `IND_FATAL`
may be sent before `IND_RESET`. It contains information about the error. It can

> be used display the error to the user for debugging purpose.

Reviewer: `to display`

|`EINVAL_HANDLE`       |`0x100a`| Invalid packet handle.                                      |
|`EINVAL_KEY_INDEX`    |`0x100b`| Invalid key index.                                          |
|`EINVAL_FRAME_LEN`    |`0x100c`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame length.                         |
|`EINVAL_FRAME_VERSION`|`0x100d`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame version.                        |
|`EINVAL_FRAME_TYPE`   |`0x100c`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame type.                           |
|`EINVAL_ADDR_MODE`    |`0x100e`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 address mode.                         |
|`EINVAL_SCF`          |`0x100f`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 security control field.               |
|`EINVAL_FRAME`        |`0x1010`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame (generic).                      |
|`EINVAL_CHAN_FIXED`   |`0x1011`| Invalid fixed channel.                                      |
|`ENOTSUP`             |`0x2000`| Unsupported feature (generic).                              |
|`ENOTSUP_FHSS_DEFAULT`|`0x2001`| Unsupported configuration mode for selected FHSS type ([`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]).|

### `0x06 SET_HOST_API`

> Inform RCP about the host API version. If not send, the RCP will assume `2.0.0`.

Reviewer: `the RCP`

    Must be at least `0x02000000`.

## Send and receive data

[tx-req]: #0x10-req_data_tx
[tx-cnf]: #0x12-cnf_data_tx
[rx]:     #0x13-ind_data_rx

### `0x10 REQ_DATA_TX`

Send a IEEE 802.15.4 frame. All data requests are followed by a data
confirmation ([`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf]) once the transaction has finished, even
in case of transmission failure or abort.

 - `uint8_t handle`  
    A unique arbitrary number used to identify a packet transmission in the
    RCP. Sent back in [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf].

 - `uint16_t frame_len`  
    Length of the IEEE 802.15.4 frame to transmit.

 - `uint8_t frame[]`  
    A IEEE 802.15.4 frame without PHR and FCS. The RCP reads and interprets the
    header to determine what processing needs to be done. The frame must not be
    encrypted at this stage, see ["Security"][sec] for more details.

    If the following fields are present, they are automatically filled by the
    RCP (their input value is ignored and overwritten):
      - Sequence number
      - Timing parameters in Wi-SUN IEs (see ["FHSS Configuration"][fhss])
      - Frame counter (see ["Security"][sec])
      - Message Integrity Code (MIC) (see ["Security"][sec])

>     <!-- TODO: Explain EDFE -->

Reviewer: Are we leaving this todo?

Author: I am not willing to document EDFE for now since we do not want it do be used by customers.

Reviewer 2: Then it probably shouldn't be mentioned at all

 - `uint16_t flags`  
    A bitfield:
     - `0x0007 FHSS_TYPE_MASK`: Type of frequency hopping algorithm to use:
         - `0x00 FHSS_TYPE_FFN_UC`: Unicast to FFN  
            `FHSS_DEFAULT == 0` only.
         - `0x01 FHSS_TYPE_FFN_BC`: Broadcast to FFN  
            `FHSS_DEFAULT == 1` only, see [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc].
         - `0x02 FHSS_TYPE_LFN_UC`: Unicast to LFN  
            `FHSS_DEFAULT == 0` only.
         - `0x03 FHSS_TYPE_LFN_BC`: Broadcast to LFN  
            `FHSS_DEFAULT == 1` only, see [`SET_FHSS_LFN_BC`][bc-lfn].

>          - `0x04 FHSS_TYPE_ASYNC`:  Asynchronous (MLME-WS-ASYNC-FRAME)  

Reviewer: Is it relevant to mention `MLME-WS-ASYNC-FRAME`?

Author: I think it's worth mentioning once in our doc, but maybe it should be in the FHSS section instead.

            `FHSS_DEFAULT == 1` only, see [`SET_FHSS_ASYNC`][async].
         - `0x06 FHSS_TYPE_LFN_PA`: LFN PAN Advertisement  
            `FHSS_DEFAULT == 0` only.
     - `0x0010 FHSS_DEFAULT`:  
        - `0`: Schedule information is passed explicitly in this request.
        - `1`: Use schedule information previously configured using a
          [`SET_FHSS`][fhss] command.
     - `0x0020 MODE_SWITCH`: Attempt mode switch with a list of specified PHYs.
     - `0x1fc0 FRAME_COUNTERS`: Bitmask of frame counters per key.
     - `0x2000 MODE_SWITCH_TYPE` (API >= 2.1.0):
       - `0`: PHY mode switch (PHR, default before API 2.1.0)
       - `1`: MAC mode switch (MAC command frame)

Only present if `FHSS_TYPE_FFN_UC`:

 - `uint64_t utt_timestamp_us`  
    Timestamp associated with the last received UTT-IE from this node. The host
    will use the `timestamp_us` value from [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf] and
    [`IND_DATA_RX`][rx].
 - `uint24_t ufsi` (from UTT-IE)

>  - `uint8_t dwell_interval` (from US-IE)

Reviewer: Space missing (for alignment)

Author: Note that consecutive spaces are always rendered as 1 space, even in monospace formatting (at least with the VSCode renderer).

Only present if `FHSS_TYPE_LFN_UC`:

 - `uint64_t lutt_timestamp_us`  
    Timestamp associated with the last received LUTT-IE from this node. The host
    will use the `timestamp_us` value from [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf] and
    [`IND_DATA_RX`][rx].
 - `uint16_t slot` (from LUTT-IE)
 - `uint24_t interval_offset_ms` (from LUTT-IE)
 - `uint24_t interval_ms` (from LUS-IE)

Only present if `FHSS_TYPE_LFN_PA`:

 - `uint64_t lnd_timestamp_us`  
    Timestamp associated with the last received LND-IE from this node. The host
    will use the `timestamp_us` value from [`IND_DATA_RX`][rx].
 - `uint24_t response_delay_ms` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint8_t  slot_duration_ms` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint8_t  slot_count` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint16_t slot_first` (from LND-IE)

> 

Reviewer: Should we mention anything regarding the other FHSS types?
Like `Other FHSS types have no additional fields.`

Only present if `FHSS_DEFAULT == 0`:

 - `struct chan_seq`  

>    [Channel sequence][chan-seq] description.

Reviewer: `See ...`

For each bit set in `FRAME_COUNTERS`:

 - `uint32_t frame_counter`  
   Minimum frame counter to accept when verifying acknowlegment frames. The
   associated key index maps to the bit offset (from 1 to 7). See
   ["Security"][sec].

Only present if `MODE_SWITCH`:

 - `struct rate_config[4]`  
    Fixed length and ordered array of rates to attempt until the transmission is

>     succesful, or all rates been tried.

Reviewer: `successful`

Reviewer: `have been tried`

     - `uint8_t phy_mode_id`: Wi-SUN PhyModeId, must be in the group selected
        with [`SET_RADIO`][rf-set].
     - `uint8_t tx_attempts`: Maximum number of attempts for this rate, try the
        next entry once this is exceeded.
     - `int8_t tx_power_dbm`: TX power to use with this entry, saturates to the
        value configured with [`SET_RADIO_TX_POWER`][rf-pow].

### `0x12 CNF_DATA_TX`

Status of an earlier data request ([`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]). Also returns the

> acknowledge frame if relevant.

Reviewer: `the IEEE 802.15.4 acknowledge frame...`

Reviewer: `acknowledgment` (all words are missing the `d` ahah)

 - `uint8_t handle`  
    Frame handle, as provided in [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req].

 - `uint8_t status`  
    See the table below for a list of status codes. The fields below may be
    invalid if `status != 0`.

 - `uint16_t frame_len`  
    Length of the IEEE 802.15.4 acknowlegment frame if received.

 - `uint8_t frame[]`  

>     Unencrypted IEEE 802.15.4 acknowlegment frame (see ["Security"][sec]).

Reviewer: `Decrypted`?

>     <!-- TODO: Explain EDFE. -->

Reviewer: Are we leaving this TODO?

Reviewer 3: What's the plan here?

 - `uint64_t timestamp_us`  

>     The timestamp (relative to the date of the RCP reset) when the frame have

Reviewer: I don't think mentioning `relative to ...` is necessary considering you already mentioned it at the beginning.

Reviewer: `when the frame has been received`

    been received.

 - `uint8_t lqi`  
    Received Link Quality Indicator (LQI) as reported by [RAIL][lqi] (ACK
    received only).

 - `int8_t rx_power_dbm`  
    Received power in dBm as reported by [RAIL][rssi] (ACK received only).

 - `uint32_t frame_counter`  
    Frame counter used in the successful transmission (see `frame_counter` in
    [`SEC_SET_KEY`][key]). Only valid if the request included an auxiliary
    security header.

>     <!-- TODO: Return the last used frame counter, even if unsuccessful. -->

Reviewer: Todo?

Author: This is more a TODO in RCP code. The issue currently is that the frame counter is incremented for all retries, but it is not returned to the host in case of TX failure.

 - `uint16_t chan_num`  

>     Channel number used in the succesful transmission.

Reviewer: `successful`

 - `uint8_t cca_failures`  

>     Number of times channel access has failed in the last CSMA-CA attempt.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if `the last CSMA-CA attempt` is precise enough 🤔

Author: Again, this is stupid to describe. I am not even sure why we decided to include this metric.
The CCA failure counter is reset when a CSMA-CA is started, which supposedly happens at every retry.
So only the last retry is counted from what I understood from the code.

Reviewer: `Since the last TX attempt`? 🤔

Reviewer: Btw, should we document somewhere the maximum number of retries?

 - `uint8_t tx_failures`  
    Number of transmission failures (without counting CCA failures).

>     <!-- TODO: Make this description more precise. -->

Reviewer: Todo?

Author: This is an absolute pain to describe. I am not sure if a CSMA-CA failure counts as a TX failure or if it's only for acknowledge frames that did not receive an ACK.

In general, we probably want a clear description of how the RCP handles retries and CSMA-CA. We will need Alban's help for that.

Reviewer: Have you tried Copilot? ahah

 - `uint8_t reserved`

Status codes

| Value | Description
|-------|-------------
|`0x00` | Success.
|`0x01` | Not enough memory available.
|`0x02` | CCA failure on all channel access attempts.
|`0x03` | No ACK received (if ACK bit set in request).
|`0x04` | Frame spent too long in RCP (10s for unicast, 20s for broadcast, 40s for async, 300s for LFN).

> |`0x05` | RCP internal error (reach out Silicon Labs support).

Reviewer: Do you want to add a `Name` column here as well?

Author: Does not seem necessary to me.

[lqi]:  https://docs.silabs.com/rail/latest/rail-api/rail-rx-packet-details-t#lqi
[rssi]: https://docs.silabs.com/rail/latest/rail-api/rail-rx-packet-details-t#rssi

### `0x13 IND_DATA_RX`

> Receive IEEE 802.15.4 frames. The RCP will start emitting these indications

Reviewer: `Reception of ...`

once the radio is started with [`SET_RADIO`][rf-set]. See
["Packet Filtering"][filter] to limit the amount of frames accepted.

 - `uint16_t frame_len`  
    Length of the received IEEE 802.15.4 frame.

 - `uint8_t frame[]`  

>     Unencrypted IEEE 802.15.4 frame, (see ["Security"][sec]).

Reviewer: `Decrypted`

 - `uint64_t timestamp_rx_us`  

>     The timestamp (relative to the date of the RCP reset) when the frame have

Reviewer: `has been received`

 - `bool enable_ms` (API > 2.0.1)  
    Enable mode switch in RX and TX, using all the PHY configurations available
    in the same group as the selected PHY. Mode switch is enabled at PHY level
    (PHR) and MAC level (MAC command frame). See [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req] for TX
    parameters.

### `0x24 SET_RADIO_REGULATION`

Enable specific radio regulation rules. Most regulations only make sense with
specific channel configurations.

 - `uint32_t value`  
    - `0`: None (disabled, default)
    - `2`: Japan ([ARIB][arib])
    - `5`: India ([WPC][wpc])  

[arib]: https://www.arib.or.jp/
[wpc]:  https://dot.gov.in/spectrum-management/2457

### `0x25 SET_RADIO_TX_POWER`

 - `int8_t tx_power_dbm`  
    Maximum transmission power in dBm. The RCP may utilize a lower value based
    on internal decision making or hardware limitations but will never exceed
    the given value. The default value is 14dBm.

## Frequency Hopping (FHSS) configuration

Several schemes are used in Wi-SUN to transmit or receive packets using
frequency hopping. These are independently defined using a set of parameters,
and may differ between transmission and reception. The following table

> summarizes which commands configure the various FHSS parameters. Note that

Reviewer: If we are talking about pure configuration, only the `SET_*` commands should be documented here.
Maybe writing about which `SET` cmd should be called to **enable** the various RX/TX capabilities would be better?

Then we can have a separate section about Wi-SUN-specific timings filled up by the RCP on `REQ_DATA_TX` (like we already have, but I think a new section/subsection is necessary).

Author: The goal of this section is to summarize all the schemes available for RX/TX and all that is necessary to make them work with the whole HIF API, not just the `SET_FHSS` commands. This paragraph should be referenced in the same way that the security section is referenced throughout the data TX/RX section (on that note maybe I'm missing a link somewhere in `REQ_DATA_TX`).

Wi-SUN is arguably quite convoluted when it comes to this so I think it is sane putting everything in a big picture.

  - `uint8_t chan_mask[]`  
     Bitmask of used channels (1 for used, 0 for excluded). Channels are
     counted byte by byte, from least to most significant bit (channel `n` maps
     to `chan_mask[n / 8] & (1 << (n % 8))`). Integrators are responsible for
     meeting local regulation contraints by excluding disallowed channels from
     the selected PHY.

[fhss]:     #frequency-hopping-fhss-configuration
[chan-seq]: #channel-sequence
[uc]:       #0x30-set_fhss_uc
[bc]:       #0x31-set_fhss_ffn_bc
[bc-lfn]:   #0x32-set_fhss_lfn_bc
[async]:    #0x33-set_fhss_async

### `0x30 SET_FHSS_UC`

Configure unicast schedule for reception.

 - `uint8_t dwell_interval`  
    Unicast dwell interval in milliseconds (from US-IE).

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   [Channel sequence][chan-seq] description.

### `0x31 SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`

Configure broadcast schedule for reception and transmission from/to FFN.

 - `uint32_t interval`  
    Broadcast interval in milliseconds (from BS-IE).

 - `uint16_t bsi`  
    Broadcast Schedule ID (from BS-IE).

 - `uint16_t dwell_interval`  
    Broadcast dwell interval in milliseconds (from BS-IE).

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   [Channel sequence][chan-seq] description.

> <!-- TODO: document parent BS-IE following -->

Reviewer: Todo?

### `0x32 SET_FHSS_LFN_BC`

Configure broadcast schedule for transmission to LFN.

 - `uint16_t interval`  
    LFN broadcast interval in milliseconds (from LBS-IE).

 - `uint16_t bsi`  
    LFN broadcast Schedule ID (from LBS-IE).

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   [Channel sequence][chan-seq] description.

> [!WARNING]
> The current RCP implementation uses the same set of parameters for FFN and
> LFN brodcast channel sequences. Thus, [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc] and
> [`SET_FHSS_LFN_BC`][bc-lfn] override each other's channel sequence. The other
> parameters are distinct.

> [!NOTE]
> The host is responsible for periodically sending LFN Time Sync frames in
> order to maintain broadcast timing in LFN children.

### `0x33 SET_FHSS_ASYNC`

Configure asynchronous transmissions for network discovery.

 - `uint32_t tx_duration`  
    Maximum number of milliseconds the RCP is allowed to stay in continuous TX
    for an async transmission. If that duration is exceeded, the async
    transmission is split into chunks of that duration until all channels have
    been used. By default, the value is set to `0xffffffff`, which disables this

>     feature.

Reviewer: Should we write about the benefits of doing so?
something along the lines of `allowing RX and TX between chunks`?

  - `uint8_t chan_mask_len`  
     Number of bytes in the following channel mask.

  - `uint8_t chan_mask[]`  
     Bitmask of channels to use for transmission. See the same field in
     ["Channel sequence"][chan-seq] for more details.

## Security

The RCP is responsible for encrypting and decrypting IEEE 802.15.4 frames.
MAC layer data appears in cleartext in HIF commands so integrators are expected
to secure the serial link, for example using [CPC with link encpryption](cpc).

> To encrypt transmitted IEEE 802.15.4 frames, an auxiliary security security

Reviewer: The word `security` is written twice

header must be included in the buffer passed to [`REQ_DATA_TX`](#0x10-req_data_tx),
and space must be reserved at the end of the frame for the Message Integrity

> Code (MIC) depending on the security level. The packet payload is not yet

Reviewer: Should we document the MIC size to use? Or at least link the relevant specification and section?

Author: Users need to open the 15.4 spec to know how to craft a frame anyway, I would not point to any specific section.

encrypted when passed to the RCP. The RCP is responsible for reading the
auxiliary security header, finding the associated key, filling the frame
counter field, encrypting the payload, and filling the MIC.

Similarly, the RCP decrypts received packets and provides them to host in
cleartext with [`IND_DATA_RX`](#0x13-ind_data_rx), with the auxiliary
security header untouched so that the host can process it.

> [!WARNING]
> The RCP does not verify the frame counter for received frames. It is the
> responsability of the host to maintain frame counters per key and per
> neighbor, and check them to prevent any replay attacks.

> Acknowledgement frames are unencrypted and sent to the host in the same manner

Reviewer: `decrypted`

> counter is always used.

[sec]: #security
[key]: #0x40-set_sec_key
[cpc]: https://github.com/SiliconLabs/cpc-daemon/blob/main/readme.md#encrypted-serial-link

### `0x40 SET_SEC_KEY`

Install a security key for encrypting/decrypting IEEE 802.15.4 frames.

 - `uint8_t key_index`  
    Key index to use. Only values from 1 to 7 (inclusive) are supported.

 - `uint8_t key[16]`  
    Key in cleartext. If all zeroes, the key is un-installed.

 - `uint32_t frame_counter`  
    The initial frame counter value (for transmission). Should be 0 at first
    installation, should be positive on re-installation (after a RCP reboot).
    The RCP is responsible for incrementing the frame counter, and the value
    is communicated to the host in [`CNF_DATA_TX`](#0x12-cnf_data_tx) after
    each encrypted transmission.

## Packet Filtering

Filter out received packets in the RCP to prevent unecessary
[`IND_DATA_RX`](#0x13-ind_data_rx) indications.

[filter]: #packet-filtering

### `0x58 SET_FILTER_PANID`

Refuse frames with an explicit PAN ID different from this value. By default,
the value is set to `0xffff` which disables the filter.

 - `uint16_t pan_id`  

### `0x5A SET_FILTER_SRC64`

> Refuse frames based on the source address. This should only be used in specific

Reviewer: `based on the MAC source address`? `based on the source address in the IEEE 802.15.4 header`?

the EUI-64 returned in [`IND_RESET`](#0x04-ind_reset) is used. This filter
cannot be disabled currently.

 - `uint8_t eui64[8]`  
    MAC address (big endian).

## Debug

### `0xE1 REQ_PING`

Send some arbitrary data to the device. The device will reply with `CNF_PING`. Use
this command to stress and debug the link with the device.

 - `uint16_t counter`  
    Arbitrary value (usually an incrementing counter that will be send back in
    confirmation).

 - `uint16_t reply_payload_size`  
    Size of the payload in the `CNF_PING`

 - `uint16_t payload_size`  
    Size of the next field

 - `uint8_t payload[]`  
    Arbitrary data. Data is not interpreted by the RCP.

### `0xE2 CNF_PING`

Reply to `REQ_PING` with some arbitrary data.

 - `uint16_t counter`  
    `counter` received in `REQ_PING`.

 - `uint16_t payload_size`  
    Same as field `reply_payload_size` in `REQ_PING`. Also define the size of
    the next field.

 - `uint8_t payload[]`  
    Arbitrary data.

## Simulation

### `0xF0 IND_REPLAY_TIMER`

Only for simulation purpose. The device will never send it.

### `0xF1 IND_REPLAY_SOCKET`

Only for simulation purpose. The device will never send it.

> 

Reviewer: Should we even document it?

# RCP Hardware Interface

This document describes the Hardware InterFace (HIF). HIF is the API between

> `wsbrd` and the RCP device.

Reviewer 4: I would not mention wsbrd here. It is the RCP API. One of the reasons why we want to document it exhaustively is to promote its use in other projects.

## General observations

In this specification, the prefix used in the command means:
  - `REQ` (request): a command sent by host to the device
  - `SET`: special case of `REQ` to configure the device
  - `CNF` (confirmation): a reply from the device to the host
  - `IND` (indication): a spontaneous frame from the device to the host

> 

Reviewer 4: Do we want to make it explicit that requests will not receive a confirmation by default?

All the types used are little endian.

The type `bool` is a `uint8_t`, but only the LSB is interpreted. All the other
bits are reserved.

> When a bit is reserved or unassigned, it be set to 0 by the transmitter and must

Reviewer 2: missing "must": it _must_ be set to 0

be ignored by the receiver.

All strings are null-terminated.

All the version numbers are encoded using `uint32_t` with the following mask:
  - `0xFF000000` Major revision
  - `0x00FFFF00` Minor revision
  - `0x000000FF` Patch

All timestamps used are in the RCP timebase and in microseconds, with origin
the device reset.

All channel numbers are defined as if there were no channel mask applied
(_ChanN = Chan0 + n * ChanSpacing_).

## Frame structure

The RCP can use the _Native UART_ or the [_CPC_ protocol][cpc]. With CPC, the
frame structure is defined by the CPC specification.

With Native UART, frames use the following structure, and use a CRC-16 for
error detection.

 - `uint16_t len`  
    Length of `payload`. Only the 11 least significant bits (`0x07FF`) are

>     used. The 5 most significant bits (`0xF800`) must ignored.

Reviewer 2: must _be_ ignored

### `0x03 REQ_RESET`

Hard reset the RCP. After this command, the host will receive `IND_RESET`.

 - `bool enter_bootloader`  
    If set, start the bootloader instead of normal firmware. Set this field if
    you want to flash a new firmware. Refer to the bootloader documentation to
    know how to send the new firmware (usually, the XMODEM protocol is used to
    send the new firmware over the UART).

### `0x04 IND_RESET`

Sent on boot of the RCP. This command may be caused by a power on, `REQ_RESET`,
a debugger, etc...

 - `uint32_t api_version`  
    Device API version

 - `uint32_t fw_version`  
    Device version

 - `char fw_version_str[]`  
    Device version string. It may include version annotation (ie.
    `1.5.0-5-ga91c352~bpo`).

 - `uint8_t hw_eui64[8]`  
    EUI64 flashed in the device

 - `uint8_t reserved[]`  
    Extra data may be included. For backward compatibility, they must be
    ignored.

### `0x05 IND_FATAL`

Commands don't reply in case of success. If the device gets misconfigured or if
any other fatal error happens, the device will reset. In this case, `IND_FATAL`
may be sent before `IND_RESET`. It contains information about the error. It can

> be used to display the error to the user for debugging purpose.

Reviewer 4: purposes

|`EINVAL_FRAME`        |`0x1010`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame (generic).                      |
|`EINVAL_CHAN_FIXED`   |`0x1011`| Invalid fixed channel.                                      |
|`ENOTSUP`             |`0x2000`| Unsupported feature (generic).                              |
|`ENOTSUP_FHSS_DEFAULT`|`0x2001`| Unsupported configuration mode for selected FHSS type ([`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]).|

### `0x06 SET_HOST_API`

Inform the RCP about the host API version. If not send, the RCP will assume
`2.0.0`. This command should be sent after `IND_RESET`, before any other
command.

 - `uint32_t api_version`  
    Must be at least `0x02000000`.

## Send and receive data

Only a subset of the IEEE 802.15.4 frame formats are supported for the needs of
Wi-SUN:

  - Frame type must be `1` (data) or `2` (ack, [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf] only).
  - Frame version must be `2`.
  - Source address mode must be `3`.
  - Destination address mode must be either `0` or `3`.
  - See ["Security"][sec] for limits on the auxiliary security header.

[cca]:    #channel-access-and-retries
[tx-req]: #0x10-req_data_tx
[tx-cnf]: #0x12-cnf_data_tx
[rx]:     #0x13-ind_data_rx

> ### Channel Access and Retries

Reviewer 4: Is it essential for the comprehension of the HIF API documentation?

Author: I think this is necessary to explain `cca_failures` and `tx_failures` in `CNF_DATA_TX`.
Also some users might be interested in the CSMA-CA parameters in use, although I am aware that documenting this may raise unwanted questions from customers.

In Wi-SUN, all transmissions require the use of Clear Channel Assessment (CCA),
but the way attempts are performed differs depending on the [FHSS type][fhss]
used.

> Unicast and broadcast to FFNs use the CSMA-CA algorithm with the following

Reviewer: The `IEEE802.15.4 CSMA-CA algorithm`

Reviewer: I would bold `FFNs` to emphasize the difference.

parameters:

| IEEE 802.15.4 MAC PIB | Value | Description |
|-----------------------|-------|-------------|
| `macMinBe`            | `3`   | Minimum Backoff Exponent (BE) for CSMA-CA.
| `macMaxBe`            | `5`   | Maximum Backoff Exponent (BE) for CSMA-CA.
| `macMaxCsmaBackoffs`  | `8`   | Number of CSMA-CA backoffs to attempt before declaring failure.
| `macMaxFrameRetries`  | `19`  | Number of retries allowed after a transmission failure.

> Unicast and broadcast transmissions to LFNs can be conceived as if they use

Reviewer: I would bold `LFNs` to emphasize the difference.

the CSMA-CA algorithm, where the backoff is not randomized but instead
corresponds to the next available TX slot. This detail matters for counting
CCA failures versus transmission failures.

> Asynchronous transmissions use a CCA per channel, and skip the channel on

Reviewer: I would bold `Asynchronous transmissions`

failure. No overall CCA failure can be returned in [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf]

> with these transmissions.

Reviewer: Do we have to explain what `Asynchronous transmissions` are?

To be clear, I would insist the CSMA backoff is not used in asynchronous transmissions.
I would also say that `no retry is performed on failure` instead of `skip the channel on failure.`

Author: > Do we have to explain what `Asynchronous transmissions` are?

I don't think so, for the same reason that we should not explain CSMA-CA in details but instead only provide the parameters.

    will use the `timestamp_us` value from [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf] and
    [`IND_DATA_RX`][rx].
 - `uint16_t slot` (from LUTT-IE)
 - `uint24_t interval_offset_ms` (from LUTT-IE)
 - `uint24_t interval_ms` (from LUS-IE)

Only present if `FHSS_TYPE_LFN_PA`:

 - `uint64_t lnd_timestamp_us`  
    Timestamp associated with the last received LND-IE from this node. The host
    will use the `timestamp_us` value from [`IND_DATA_RX`][rx].
 - `uint24_t response_delay_ms` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint8_t  slot_duration_ms` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint8_t  slot_count` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint16_t slot_first` (from LND-IE)

Other FHSS types have no additional fields.

Only present if `FHSS_DEFAULT == 0`:

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   See ["Channel Sequence"][chan-seq].

For each bit set in `FRAME_COUNTERS`:

 - `uint32_t frame_counter`  
   Minimum frame counter to accept when verifying acknowlegment frames. The
   associated key index maps to the bit offset (from 1 to 7). See
   ["Security"][sec].

Only present if `MODE_SWITCH`:

 - `struct rate_config[4]`  
    Fixed length and ordered array of rates to attempt until the transmission is

>     successful, or all rates have been tried. Mode switch only makes sense with

Reviewer 4: `Mode switch only makes sense with unicast transmissions.`

I'd either remove that sentence or move it to the flag documentation. 

Did you mean that it was not supported?

    unicast transmissions.
     - `uint8_t phy_mode_id`: Wi-SUN PhyModeId, must be in the group selected
        with [`SET_RADIO`][rf-set].
     - `uint8_t tx_attempts`: Maximum number of attempts for this rate, try the
        next entry once this is exceeded. Note that this overrides
        `macMaxFrameRetries` described in ["Channel Access and Retries"][cca].
     - `int8_t tx_power_dbm`: TX power to use with this entry, saturates to the
        value configured with [`SET_RADIO_TX_POWER`][rf-pow].

### `0x12 CNF_DATA_TX`

Status of an earlier data request ([`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]). Also returns the

> IEEE 802.15.4 acknowledgement frame if relevant.

Reviewer 4: if relevant = if the tx was a unicast?

    Length of the IEEE 802.15.4 acknowledgment frame if received.

 - `uint8_t frame[]`  
    Decrypted IEEE 802.15.4 acknowledgment frame (see ["Security"][sec]).
    <!-- TODO: Explain EDFE. -->

 - `uint64_t timestamp_us`  
    The timestamp (relative to the date of the RCP reset) when the frame has
    been received.

 - `uint8_t lqi`  
    Received Link Quality Indicator (LQI) as reported by [RAIL][lqi] (ACK
    received only).

 - `int8_t rx_power_dbm`  
    Received power in dBm as reported by [RAIL][rssi] (ACK received only).

 - `uint32_t frame_counter`  
    Frame counter used in the successful transmission (see `frame_counter` in
    [`SEC_SET_KEY`][key]). Only valid if the request included an auxiliary
    security header.
    <!-- TODO: Return the last used frame counter, even if unsuccessful. -->

 - `uint16_t chan_num`  
    Channel number used in the successful transmission.

 - `uint8_t cca_failures`  
    Number of times channel access has failed consecutively (due to CCA failure
    or busy RX). For aknowledged frames, this counter is reset whenever the
    frame is transmitted on the radio but no acknowledgement is received.

 - `uint8_t tx_failures`  

>     Number of transmission failures (without counting CCA failures).

Reviewer 4: "does not account for CCA failures" may sound better?

 - `uint8_t reserved`

Status codes:

| Value | Description
|-------|-------------
|`0x00` | Success.
|`0x01` | Not enough memory available.
|`0x02` | Channel access failure (CCA failure or busy RX).
|`0x03` | No ACK received (if ACK bit set in request).

> |`0x04` | Frame spent too long in RCP (10s for unicast, 20s for broadcast, 40s for async, 300s for LFN).

Reviewer 4: I'm curious, what could cause that timeout? Is it a failsafe in case a packet in stuck in the RCP?

Author: I see this as a failsafe. I believe it can be triggered if there are many packets in the RCP queues.

configured with [`SET_FHSS_UC`][uc].

Body of this command is empty.

### `0x21 REQ_RADIO_LIST`

Request the list of radio configuration supported by the device, typically
issued by the host during a startup sequence before selecting a PHY
configuration. The RCP will answer with a series of [`CNF_RADIO_LIST`][rf-list]
commands.

Body of this command is empty.

### `0x22 CNF_RADIO_LIST`

List of radio configuration supported by the RCP, as configured during project
generation. Entries are defined in groups of mode-switch compatible PHYs. For
OFDM configurations, all MCS are defined in the same entry.

 - `uint8_t entry_size`  
    Size of a radio configuration entry in bytes. This is meant to support API
    evolution.

 - `bool list_end`  
    If not set, the list will continue in another [`CNF_RADIO_LIST`][rf-list].

 - `uint8_t count`  
    Number of radio configuration entries in next field.

 - `struct rf_config[]`  
    - `uint16_t flags`
        - `0x0001`: If set, this entry is in same group than the previous.
        - `0x01FE`: Bitfield of supported OFDM MCS (from MCS0 to MCS11).
    - `uint8_t rail_phy_mode_id`  

>        Wi-SUN PhyModeId, but for OFDM, only MCS0 exists.

Reviewer 4: That isn't very clear. 

For OFDM, only set the PhyType. 
For OFDM, only set the Option number.

    - `uint32_t chan_f0`  
       Frequency of the first channel in Hz.
    - `uint32_t chan_spacing`  
       Channel spacing in Hz.
    - `uint16_t chan_count`  
       Number of channels without holes in the spectrum.
    - `uint16_t sensitivity` (API >= 2.4.0)  
       Minimum RX sensitivity in dBm for this PHY.

### `0x23 SET_RADIO`

Configure the radio parameters.

 - `uint8_t index`  
    Index in the `rf_config` list.

 - `uint8_t mcs`  
    MCS to be used if `index` points to an OFDM modulation.

>  - `bool enable_ms` (API > 2.0.1)  

Reviewer 4: FYI: I'm not saying it should be changed but I read "enable milliseconds".

    Enable mode switch in reception at PHY level (PHR), using all the PHY
    configurations available in the same group as the selected PHY. Note that

>     mode switch  cannot be disabled at MAC level (MAC command frame).

Reviewer 4: I see two white spaces between switch and cannot.

    [`IND_DATA_RX`][rx].

 - `uint16_t slot`  
    Broadcast slot (from BT-IE).

 - `uint32_t interval_offset_ms`  
    Broadcast interval offset (from BT-IE).

 - `uint32_t frame_counters[4]`  
    Initial frame counters for this node for all keys (indices 1 through 4). As
    described in ["Security"][sec], the RCP generally does not check for frame
    counters since it is the responsability of the host. However this makes it
    easy to break the RCP broadcast schedule by replaying a frame containing a
    BT-IE. Thus the RCP can track the frame counters for a single parent. These
    counters are not reset when installing a new key, so it is recommended to
    always call [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc] with updated counters right after
    calling [`SEC_SET_KEY`][key].

### `0x32 SET_FHSS_LFN_BC`

Configure broadcast schedule for transmission to LFN.

 - `uint16_t interval`  
    LFN broadcast interval in milliseconds (from LBS-IE).

 - `uint16_t bsi`  
    LFN broadcast Schedule ID (from LBS-IE).

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   See ["Channel Sequence"][chan-seq].

> [!WARNING]
> The current RCP implementation uses the same set of parameters for FFN and

> > LFN brodcast channel sequences. Thus, [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc] and

Reviewer 2: typo _brodcast_

> parameters are distinct.

> [!NOTE]
> The host is responsible for periodically sending LFN Time Sync frames in
> order to maintain broadcast timing in LFN children.

### `0x33 SET_FHSS_ASYNC`

Configure asynchronous transmissions for network discovery.

 - `uint32_t tx_duration_ms`  
    Maximum number of milliseconds the RCP is allowed to stay in continuous TX
    for an async transmission. If that duration is exceeded, the async
    transmission is split into chunks of that duration until all channels have
    been used. This mechanism makes the RCP radio available for other tasks
    between the async chunks, which becomes relevant for PHY configurations
    with many channels. By default, the value is set to `0xffffffff`, which
    disables this feature.

  - `uint8_t chan_mask_len`  
     Number of bytes in the following channel mask.

  - `uint8_t chan_mask[]`  
     Bitmask of channels to use for transmission. See the same field in
     ["Channel Sequence"][chan-seq] for more details.

## Security

The RCP is responsible for encrypting and decrypting IEEE 802.15.4 frames.
MAC layer data appears in cleartext in HIF commands so integrators are expected

> to secure the serial link, for example using [CPC with link encpryption][cpc-sec].

Reviewer 4: I think we can insist even more here. We could clarify that the system will be exposed to packet injection and eavesdropping if it's not done.

# RCP Hardware Interface

> This document describes the Hardware InterFace (HIF) for the Silicon Labs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document describes the Hardware Interface (HIF) for the Silicon Labs
```

Wi-SUN Radio Co-Processor (RCP). The RCP implements IEEE 802.15.4 frame
transmission and reception using Wi-SUN frequency hopping and this API
allows a host to control it using commands sent on a serial bus.

## General observations

In this specification, the prefix used in the command means:

>   - `REQ` (request): a command sent by host to the device

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `REQ` (request): a command sent by the host to the device
```

  - `SET`: special case of `REQ` to configure the device
  - `CNF` (confirmation): a reply from the device to the host
  - `IND` (indication): a spontaneous frame from the device to the host

By default, requests do not receive confirmations, the only exceptions are
[`REQ_RADIO_LIST`][rf-get] and [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req].

All the types used are little endian.

The type `bool` is a `uint8_t`, but only the LSB is interpreted. All the other
bits are reserved.

> When a bit is reserved or unassigned, it be must set to 0 by the transmitter

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a bit is reserved or unassigned, it must be set to 0 by the transmitter
```

and must be ignored by the receiver.

All strings are null-terminated.

All the version numbers are encoded using `uint32_t` with the following mask:
  - `0xFF000000` Major revision
  - `0x00FFFF00` Minor revision
  - `0x000000FF` Patch

> All timestamps used are in the RCP timebase and in microseconds, with origin

Reviewer 3: Just a reformulation for better clarity
```suggestion
All timestamps are based on the RCP timebase, measured in microseconds,
```

> the device reset.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with the origin set at the device reset.
```

All channel numbers are defined as if there were no channel mask applied

> (_ChanN = Chan0 + n * ChanSpacing_).

Reviewer 3: Is N in ChanN the same as the n in the formula, if it is the case we can write change the formula for clarity:
```suggestion
(_Chan_n = Chan0 + n * ChanSpacing_).
```

## Frame structure

The RCP can use the _Native UART_ or the [_CPC_ protocol][cpc]. With CPC, the
frame structure is defined by the CPC specification.

With Native UART, frames use the following structure, and use a CRC-16 for
error detection.

 - `uint16_t len`  

>     Length of `payload`. Only the 11 least significant bits (`0x07FF`) are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Length of the `payload`. Only the 11 least significant bits (`0x07FF`) are
```

    used. The 5 most significant bits (`0xF800`) must be ignored.

 - `uint16_t hcs`  
    [CRC-16/MCRF4XX][hcs] of the `len` field.

 - `uint8_t payload[]`  
    Frame payload.

 - `uint16_t fcs`  
    [CRC-A][fcs] of the `payload` field.

Regardless of the framing protocol used, the payload always has the following
structure:

 - `uint8_t cmd`  
    Command number.

 - `uint8_t body[]`  
    Command body.

[cpc]: https://docs.silabs.com/gecko-platform/latest/platform-cpc-overview
[hcs]: https://reveng.sourceforge.io/crc-catalogue/16.htm#crc.cat.crc-16-mcrf4xx
[fcs]: https://reveng.sourceforge.io/crc-catalogue/16.htm#crc.cat.crc-16-iso-iec-14443-3-a

## Administrative commands

[reset]: #0x03-req_reset

### `0x01 REQ_NOP`

No-operation. Can be used to synchronize UART communication.

> 

Reviewer 3: I suggest adding this header to all the commands

```suggestion

#### Command Body

```

Author: Nah it generates a unnecessary bookmark and does not bring much more clarity imo.

 - `uint8_t garbage[]`  
    Data after command is ignored.

### `0x02 IND_NOP`

No-operation. Can be used to synchronize UART communication.

 - `uint8_t garbage[]`  
    Extra data may be included. Must be ignored.

### `0x03 REQ_RESET`

Hard reset the RCP. After this command, the host will receive `IND_RESET`.

 - `bool enter_bootloader`  
    If set, start the bootloader instead of normal firmware. Set this field if
    you want to flash a new firmware. Refer to the bootloader documentation to
    know how to send the new firmware (usually, the XMODEM protocol is used to

>     send the new firmware over the UART).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    If set to `true`, the bootloader will start instead of the normal firmware. Use this 
    option when flashing new firmware. For details on how to upload the new 
    firmware (typically using the XMODEM protocol over UART), refer to the 
    bootloader documentation.
```

### `0x04 IND_RESET`

Sent on boot of the RCP. This command may be caused by a power on, `REQ_RESET`,
a debugger, etc...

 - `uint32_t api_version`  
    Device API version

 - `uint32_t fw_version`  
    Device version

 - `char fw_version_str[]`  
    Device version string. It may include version annotation (ie.
    `1.5.0-5-ga91c352~bpo`).

 - `uint8_t hw_eui64[8]`  

>     EUI64 flashed in the device

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    EUI64 flashed on the device
```

 - `uint8_t reserved[]`  

>     Extra data may be included. For backward compatibility, they must be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Extra data may be included. For backward compatibility, it must be
```

    ignored.

### `0x05 IND_FATAL`

Commands don't reply in case of success. If the device gets misconfigured or if
any other fatal error happens, the device will reset. In this case, `IND_FATAL`
may be sent before `IND_RESET`. It contains information about the error. It can

> be used to display the error to the user for debugging purposes.

Reviewer 3: The IND_FATAL may be sent or will be sent before the `IND_RESET`?
```suggestion
Commands do not send a reply upon success. However, if the device becomes
misconfigured or encounters a fatal error, it will reset. In such cases, an
`IND_FATAL` message may be sent before `IND_RESET`, providing details about 
the error. This information can be used to display the error to the user for 
debugging purposes.
```

 - `uint16_t error_code`  

>     See the table below for the list of errors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Refer to the table below for the detailed list of errors.
```

 - `char error_string[]`  

>     Human readable error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Human-readable error message.
```

|`EINVAL_FHSS_TYPE`    |`0x1006`| Invalid FHSS type ([`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]).                |
|`EINVAL_CHAN_MASK`    |`0x1007`| Invalid channel mask.                                       |
|`EINVAL_CHAN_FUNC`    |`0x1008`| Invalid channel function.                                   |
|`EINVAL_ASYNC_TXLEN`  |`0x1009`| Invalid asynchronous transmission maximum duration ([`SET_FHSS_ASYNC`][async]).|
|`EINVAL_HANDLE`       |`0x100a`| Invalid packet handle.                                      |
|`EINVAL_KEY_INDEX`    |`0x100b`| Invalid key index.                                          |
|`EINVAL_FRAME_LEN`    |`0x100c`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame length.                         |
|`EINVAL_FRAME_VERSION`|`0x100d`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame version.                        |
|`EINVAL_FRAME_TYPE`   |`0x100c`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame type.                           |
|`EINVAL_ADDR_MODE`    |`0x100e`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 address mode.                         |
|`EINVAL_SCF`          |`0x100f`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 security control field.               |
|`EINVAL_FRAME`        |`0x1010`| Invalid IEEE 802.15.4 frame (generic).                      |

> |`EINVAL_CHAN_FIXED`   |`0x1011`| Invalid fixed channel.                                      |

Reviewer 3: I prefer `EINVAL_FIXED_CHAN` :sweat_smile:
```suggestion
|`EINVAL_FIXED_CHAN`   |`0x1011`| Invalid fixed channel.                                      |
```

|`ENOTSUP`             |`0x2000`| Unsupported feature (generic).                              |
|`ENOTSUP_FHSS_DEFAULT`|`0x2001`| Unsupported configuration mode for selected FHSS type ([`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]).|

### `0x06 SET_HOST_API`

Inform the RCP about the host API version. If not send, the RCP will assume
`2.0.0`. This command should be sent after `IND_RESET`, before any other

> command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Informs the RCP of the host API version. If this command is not sent, the
RCP will assume the API version is `2.0.0`. This command must be sent
after `IND_RESET` and before any other command.
```

 - `uint32_t api_version`  
    Must be at least `0x02000000`.

## Send and receive data

Only a subset of the IEEE 802.15.4 frame formats are supported for the needs of
Wi-SUN:

>   - Frame type must be `1` (data) or `2` (ack, [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf] only).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Frame type must be either `1` (data) or `2` (ack, [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf] only).
```

  - Frame version must be `2`.
  - Source address mode must be `3`.
  - Destination address mode must be either `0` or `3`.
  - See ["Security"][sec] for limits on the auxiliary security header.

[cca]:    #channel-access-and-retries
[tx-req]: #0x10-req_data_tx
[tx-cnf]: #0x12-cnf_data_tx
[rx]:     #0x13-ind_data_rx

### Channel Access and Retries

In Wi-SUN, all transmissions require the use of Clear Channel Assessment (CCA),

> but the way attempts are performed differs depending on the [FHSS type][fhss]
> used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but the way attempts are performed differs depending on the used
[FHSS type][fhss].
```

Unicast and broadcast ***to FFNs*** use the IEEE 802.15.4 CSMA-CA algorithm
with the following parameters:

| IEEE 802.15.4 MAC PIB | Value | Description |
|-----------------------|-------|-------------|
| `macMinBe`            | `3`   | Minimum Backoff Exponent (BE) for CSMA-CA.
| `macMaxBe`            | `5`   | Maximum Backoff Exponent (BE) for CSMA-CA.
| `macMaxCsmaBackoffs`  | `8`   | Number of CSMA-CA backoffs to attempt before declaring failure.
| `macMaxFrameRetries`  | `19`  | Number of retries allowed after a transmission failure.

Unicast and broadcast transmissions ***to LFNs*** can be conceived as if they
use the CSMA-CA algorithm, where the backoff is not randomized but instead
corresponds to the next available TX slot. This detail matters for counting
CCA failures versus transmission failures.

***Asynchronous*** transmissions use one CCA per channel, and skip the channel on
failure without attempting any retry. No overall CCA failure can be returned in

> [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf] with these transmissions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
***Asynchronous*** transmissions use one CCA per channel and skip the channel on
failure without attempting any retries. No overall CCA failure is returned in
[`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf] for these transmissions.
```

### `0x10 REQ_DATA_TX`

Send a IEEE 802.15.4 frame. All data requests are followed by a data
confirmation ([`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf]) once the transaction has finished, even

> in case of transmission failure or abort.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sends an IEEE 802.15.4 frame. All data requests are followed by a data
confirmation ([`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf]) once the transaction is complete, even
in case of transmission failure or abort.
```

 - `uint8_t handle`  
    A unique arbitrary number used to identify a packet transmission in the
    RCP. Sent back in [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf].

 - `uint16_t frame_len`  
    Length of the IEEE 802.15.4 frame to transmit.

 - `uint8_t frame[]`  
    A IEEE 802.15.4 frame without PHR and FCS. The RCP reads and interprets the
    header to determine what processing needs to be done. The frame must not be

>     encrypted at this stage, see ["Security"][sec] for more details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    An IEEE 802.15.4 frame without PHR and FCS. The RCP reads and interprets the
    header to determine what processing is needed to be done. The frame must not
     be encrypted at this stage, see ["Security"][sec] for more details.
```

    If the following fields are present, they are automatically filled by the
    RCP (their input value is ignored and overwritten):
      - Sequence number

>       - Timing parameters in Wi-SUN IEs (UTT, BT, LBT, LTO) (see

Reviewer 3: I think we should add an abbreviation section

 - `uint16_t slot` (from LUTT-IE)
 - `uint24_t interval_offset_ms` (from LUTT-IE)
 - `uint24_t interval_ms` (from LUS-IE)

Only present if `FHSS_TYPE_LFN_PA`:

 - `uint64_t lnd_timestamp_us`  
    Timestamp associated with the last received LND-IE from this node. The host
    will use the `timestamp_us` value from [`IND_DATA_RX`][rx].
 - `uint24_t response_delay_ms` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint8_t  slot_duration_ms` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint8_t  slot_count` (from LND-IE)
 - `uint16_t slot_first` (from LND-IE)

Other FHSS types have no additional fields.

Only present if `FHSS_DEFAULT == 0`:

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   See ["Channel Sequence"][chan-seq].

For each bit set in `FRAME_COUNTERS`:

 - `uint32_t frame_counter`  
   Minimum frame counter to accept when verifying acknowlegment frames. The
   associated key index maps to the bit offset (from 1 to 7). See
   ["Security"][sec].

Only present if `MODE_SWITCH`:

 - `struct rate_config[4]`  
    Fixed length and ordered array of rates to attempt until the transmission
    is successful, or all rates have been tried.
     - `uint8_t phy_mode_id`: Wi-SUN _PhyModeId_, must be in the group selected
        with [`SET_RADIO`][rf-set].

>      - `uint8_t tx_attempts`: Maximum number of attempts for this rate, try the
>         next entry once this is exceeded. Note that this overrides
>         `macMaxFrameRetries` described in ["Channel Access and Retries"][cca].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - `uint8_t tx_attempts`: The maximum number of attempts allowed for the
        selected rate. Once this limit is exceeded, the next entry will be tried.
        Note that this value overrides `macMaxFrameRetries` described in
        ["Channel Access and Retries"][cca].
```

>      - `int8_t tx_power_dbm`: TX power to use with this entry, saturates to the
>         value configured with [`SET_RADIO_TX_POWER`][rf-pow].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - `int8_t tx_power_dbm`: The TX power to be used with this entry, limited
        to the maximum value configured with [`SET_RADIO_TX_POWER`][rf-pow].
```

### `0x12 CNF_DATA_TX`

Status of an earlier data request ([`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]). Also returns the
IEEE 802.15.4 acknowledgement frame if the request had the acknowledgement
request bit set in the header.

 - `uint8_t handle`  
    Frame handle, as provided in [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req].

 - `uint8_t status`  
    See the table below for a list of status codes. The fields below may be
    invalid if `status != 0`.

 - `uint16_t frame_len`  
    Length of the IEEE 802.15.4 acknowledgment frame if received.

 - `uint8_t frame[]`  
    Decrypted IEEE 802.15.4 acknowledgment frame (see ["Security"][sec]).
    <!-- TODO: Explain EDFE. -->

 - `uint64_t timestamp_us`  
    The timestamp (relative to the date of the RCP reset) when the frame has
    been received.

 - `uint8_t lqi`  
    Received Link Quality Indicator (LQI) as reported by [RAIL][lqi] (ACK

>     received only).

Reviewer 3: we should drop this one

Author: The API is already in use, it cannot be simply dropped unfortunately.

Reviewer 5: BTW, why don't we want to report it?

Reviewer 4: Because it is not used and may be misleading. It's opening the door to questions like "why my parent is not that router instead, its lqi is better than the one chosen by RPL"

Reviewer 5: This API has been designed to allow customers to do customisation. This is the reason why we expose all the data we can rather than only the needed one.

 - `uint8_t reserved`

Status codes:

| Value | Description
|-------|-------------
|`0x00` | Success.
|`0x01` | Not enough memory available.
|`0x02` | Channel access failure (CCA failure or busy RX).
|`0x03` | No ACK received (if ACK bit set in request).
|`0x04` | Frame spent too long in RCP (10s for unicast, 20s for broadcast, 40s for async, 300s for LFN).
|`0x05` | RCP internal error (reach out Silicon Labs support).

[lqi]:  https://docs.silabs.com/rail/latest/rail-api/rail-rx-packet-details-t#lqi
[rssi]: https://docs.silabs.com/rail/latest/rail-api/rail-rx-packet-details-t#rssi

### `0x13 IND_DATA_RX`

Receive IEEE 802.15.4 frames. The RCP will start emitting these indications
once the radio is started with [`SET_RADIO`][rf-set]. See
["Packet Filtering"][filter] to limit the amount of frames accepted.

 - `uint16_t frame_len`  
    Length of the received IEEE 802.15.4 frame.

 - `uint8_t frame[]`  
    Decrypted IEEE 802.15.4 frame, (see ["Security"][sec]).

 - `uint64_t timestamp_rx_us`  
    The timestamp (relative to the date of the RCP reset) when the frame has
    been received on the device.

 - `uint8_t lqi`  

>     Received Link Quality Indicator (LQI) as reported by [RAIL][lqi].

Reviewer 3: Same here, we should drop LQI

 - `uint8_t mcs`  
    MCS to be used if `index` points to an OFDM modulation.

 - `bool enable_mode_switch` (API > 2.0.1)  
    Enable mode switch in reception at PHY level (PHR), using all the PHY
    configurations available in the same group as the selected PHY. Note that
    mode switch cannot be disabled at MAC level (MAC command frame).

> [!NOTE]
> The host is responsible for advertising a list of supported _PhyModeId_ in a
> POM-IE. There may be more PHY supported in the RCP than advertised since the
> IE format restricts to 16 entries.

### `0x24 SET_RADIO_REGULATION`

Enable specific radio regulation rules. Most regulations only make sense with
specific channel configurations.

 - `uint32_t value`  
    - `0`: None (disabled, default)
    - `2`: Japan ([ARIB][arib])
    - `5`: India ([WPC][wpc])  

[arib]: https://www.arib.or.jp/
[wpc]:  https://dot.gov.in/spectrum-management/2457

### `0x25 SET_RADIO_TX_POWER`

 - `int8_t tx_power_dbm`  
    Maximum transmission power in dBm. The RCP may utilize a lower value based
    on internal decision making or hardware limitations but will never exceed
    the given value. The default value is 14dBm.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - `int8_t tx_power_dbm`  
    Maximum transmission power in dBm. The RCP may use a lower value based
    on internal decision-making or hardware limitations but will never exceed
    the given value. The default value is 14dBm.
```

## Frequency Hopping (FHSS) configuration

Several schemes are used in Wi-SUN to transmit or receive packets using

> frequency hopping. These are independently defined using a set of parameters,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
frequency hopping. These are independently defined using a set of parameters
```

and may differ between transmission and reception. The following table
summarizes which commands configure the various FHSS parameters. Note that
[`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req] always needs to be called for transmission, but timing

> parameters are sometimes passed with the command, and sometimes stored in the

Reviewer 3: "sometimes" is vague can we say exactly when?

Author: "sometimes" is described in the table, I do not think there is a simple way to write it down.

    - LFN Broadcast Interval Offset
  - LTO-IE:
    - Offset  
      The host sets this field as an offset relative to the start of the LFN
      broadcast window (see [`SET_FHSS_LFN_BC`][bc-lfn]). The RCP recomputes
      the offset to be relative to the destination LFN's unicast schedule,
      based on the timing information passed in [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req].

### Channel Sequence

Most [`SET_FHSS`][fhss] commands configure a channel sequence using the
following variable-length structure:

 - `uint8_t chan_func`  
    Wi-SUN channel function, supported values are:
    - `0`: Single fixed channel. (API >= 2.1.1)
    - `2`: Direct Hash 1 (DH1CF) defined by Wi-SUN.

Only present if `chan_func == 0`:

  - `uint16_t chan_fixed`  
     Fixed channel number, valid range depends on the selected PHY.

Only present if `chan_func == 2`:

  - `uint8_t chan_mask_len`  
     Number of bytes in the following channel mask.

  - `uint8_t chan_mask[]`  
     Bitmask of used channels (1 for used, 0 for excluded). Channels are
     counted byte by byte, from least to most significant bit (channel `n` maps
     to `chan_mask[n / 8] & (1 << (n % 8))`). Integrators are responsible for

>      meeting local regulation contraints by excluding disallowed channels from

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     meeting local regulation constraints by excluding disallowed channels from
```

### `0x30 SET_FHSS_UC`

Configure unicast schedule for reception.

 - `uint8_t dwell_interval`  
    Unicast dwell interval in milliseconds (from US-IE).

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   See ["Channel Sequence"][chan-seq].

### `0x31 SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`

Configure broadcast schedule for reception and transmission from/to FFN.

 - `uint32_t interval`  
    Broadcast interval in milliseconds (from BS-IE).

 - `uint16_t bsi`  
    Broadcast Schedule ID (from BS-IE).

 - `uint16_t dwell_interval`  
    Broadcast dwell interval in milliseconds (from BS-IE).

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   See ["Channel Sequence"][chan-seq].

If API >= 2.3.0 (optional block):

 - `uint8_t eui64[8]`  
    MAC address of a neighboring node whose broadcast schedule should be
    followed (typically a RPL parent or an EAPoL target). The RCP will read
    the BT-IE of frames received from that source address to maintain its
    broadcast schedule synchronized, which prevents needing to regularly update
    RCP timing from the host. By default, the address is set to
    `ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff`, which disable parent following. Not including
    this block in the command also disables parent following. The next

>     parameters set up the initial timings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    MAC address of a neighboring node whose broadcast schedule should be
    followed (typically a RPL parent or an EAPoL target). The RCP will read
    the BT-IE of frames received from that source address to maintain its
    broadcast schedule synchronized, which prevents needing to regularly update
    RCP timing from the host. By default, the address is set to
    `ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff`, which disables the parent following. Not including
    this block in the command also disables the parent following. The next
    parameters set up the initial timings.
```

the value is set to `0xffff` which disables the filter.

 - `uint16_t pan_id`  

### `0x5A SET_FILTER_SRC64`

Refuse frames based on the source MAC address. This should only be used in
specific testing scenarios to force network topologies. By default, the address
list is empty.

 - `bool allowed_list`  
   Instead of setting a list of denied address, set a list of allowed addresses
   where unknown ones are refused. Both ways are mutually exclusive and this
   command always resets the address list.

 - `uint8_t count`  
   Number of MAC addresses in the next field.

 - `uint8_t eui64[8][]`  
   List of MAC addresses (big endian) to deny/allow.

### `0x59 SET_FILTER_DST64`

Refuse unicast frames whose destination MAC address is not this EUI-64. By
default, the EUI-64 returned in [`IND_RESET`](#0x04-ind_reset) is used. This
filter cannot be disabled currently.

 - `uint8_t eui64[8]`  
    MAC address (big endian).

## Debug

### `0xE1 REQ_PING`

Send some arbitrary data to the device. The device will reply with `CNF_PING`. Use
this command to stress and debug the link with the device.

 - `uint16_t counter`  

>     Arbitrary value (usually an incrementing counter that will be send back in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Arbitrary value (usually an incrementing counter that will be sent back in
```

transmission and reception using Wi-SUN frequency hopping and this API
allows a host to control it using commands sent on a serial bus.

## Acronyms

| Acronym | Source        | Meaning
|---------|---------------|---------
| FHSS    |               | Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum
| EUI-64  | IEEE RA       | [64-bit Extended Unique Identifier][eui64]
| CCA     | IEEE 802.15.4 | Clear Channel Assessment
| CSMA-CA | IEEE 802.15.4 | Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance
| IE      | IEEE 802.15.4 | Information Element
| BT-IE   | Wi-SUN        | Broadcast Timing IE
| FFN     | Wi-SUN        | Full Function Node
| LFN     | Wi-SUN        | Limited Function Node

> | LB-IE  | Wi-SUN        | LFN Broadcast Timing IE

Reviewer 5: indent

With Native UART, the frame structure is:

 - `uint16_t len`  
    Length of `payload`. Only the 11 least significant bits (`0x07FF`) are
    used. The 5 most significant bits (`0xF800`) must ignored.

 - `uint16_t hcs`  
    CRC16 of the `len` field.

 - `uint8_t payload[]`  
    Frame payload.

 - `uint16_t fcs`  
    CRC16 of the `payload` field.

With both protocols, the frame payload is in the following form:

 - `uint8_t cmd`  

>    Command number.

Reviewer 5: Indentation

 - `uint8_t body[]`  

>    Command body.

Reviewer 5: Ditto

## Send and receive data

[tx-req]: #0x10-req_data_tx
[tx-cnf]: #0x12-cnf_data_tx
[rx]:     #0x13-ind_data_rx

### `0x10 REQ_DATA_TX`

Send a IEEE 802.15.4 frame. All data requests are followed by a data
confirmation ([`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf]) once the transaction has finished, even
in case of transmission failure or abort.

 - `uint8_t handle`  
    A unique arbitrary number used to identify a packet transmission in the
    RCP. Sent back in [`CNF_DATA_TX`][tx-cnf].

 - `uint16_t frame_len`  
    Length of the IEEE 802.15.4 frame to transmit.

 - `uint8_t frame[]`  
    A IEEE 802.15.4 frame without PHR and FCS. The RCP reads and interprets the
    header to determine what processing needs to be done. The frame must not be
    encrypted at this stage, see ["Security"][sec] for more details.

    If the following fields are present, they are automatically filled by the
    RCP (their input value is ignored and overwritten):
      - Sequence number

>       - Timing parameters in Wi-SUN IEs (see ["FHSS Configuration"][fhss])

Reviewer 5: ... IEs (UTT, BT, LBT) (see ...

 - `uint8_t count`  
    Number of radio configuration entries in next field.

 - `struct rf_config[]`  
    - `uint16_t flags`
        - `0x0001`: If set, this entry is in same group than the previous.
        - `0x01FE`: Bitfield of supported OFDM MCS (from MCS0 to MCS11).
    - `uint8_t rail_phy_mode_id`  
       Wi-SUN PhyModeId, but for OFDM, only MCS0 exists.
    - `uint32_t chan_f0`  
       Frequency of the first channel in Hz.
    - `uint32_t chan_spacing`  
       Channel spacing in Hz.
    - `uint16_t chan_count`  
       Number of channels without holes in the spectrum.
    - `uint16_t sensitivity` (API >= 2.4.0)  
       Minimum RX sensitivity in dBm for this PHY.

### `0x23 SET_RADIO`

Configure the radio parameters.

 - `uint8_t index`  
    Index in the `rf_config` list.

 - `uint8_t mcs`  
    MCS to be used if `index` points to an OFDM modulation.

 - `bool enable_ms` (API > 2.0.1)  
    Enable mode switch in RX and TX, using all the PHY configurations available
    in the same group as the selected PHY. Mode switch is enabled at PHY level
    (PHR) and MAC level (MAC command frame). See [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req] for TX

>     parameters.

Reviewer 5: I thought this field only impacts Rx (Tx is managed by `REQ_DATA_TX`)

Author: I need to check with Alban. Code makes it not obvious.

### `0x24 SET_RADIO_REGULATION`

Enable specific radio regulation rules. Most regulations only make sense with
specific channel configurations.

 - `uint32_t value`  
    - `0`: None (disabled, default)
    - `2`: Japan ([ARIB][arib])

>     - `5`: India ([WPC][wpc])  

Reviewer 5: Maybe we can mention the reserved values:
```
 - `uint32_t value`  
    - `0`: None (disabled, default)
    - `1`: Reserved (future restrictions for North America (FCC))
    - `2`: Japan ([ARIB][arib])
    - `3`: Reserved (future restrictions for Europe (ETSI))
    - `4`: Reserved
    - `5`: India ([WPC][wpc])

Author: What is the benefit?

Also I wanted to give a bit more details regarding what behavior changes, but I realized that I do not know what ARIB does, I'll take the time to talk to fill that info.

Reviewer: I don't think this specification is the place where an explanation should be written, is it?
To my eyes, links to the various specifications is enough.

It might also be smart from a customer point of view to not give any details here, they will reach out to us if they want to know more.

Author: The thing is, we are most definitely not implementing all features requested by the regulation specs, we do not want to pretend that these settings ensure a regional certification.

Reviewer: I am now asking myself "what are we marketing" about that?
Let's be honest, I believe we are not entirely transparent on that anyways.

This should be documented on DSC.

Reviewer 4: I agree with Kilio22, I think we'll probably end up with something on dsc. We'll point to that page then.

Author: atm there are no details given with the doc for [`sl_wisun_set_regulation()`](https://docs.silabs.com/wisun/2.2.0/wisun-stack-api/sl-wisun-api#sl-wisun-set-regulation).

frequency hopping. These are independently defined using a set of parameters,
and may differ between transmission and reception. The following table
summarizes which commands configure the various FHSS parameters. Note that
[`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req] always needs to be called for transmission, but timing
parameters are sometimes passed with the command, and sometimes stored in the
RCP and configured once using a [`SET_FHSS`][fhss] command. See the description
of these commands for a more detailed explanation.

|  FHSS type                | Reception               | Transmission                |
|---------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Unicast to FFN            | [`SET_FHSS_UC`][uc]     | [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]     |
| Broadcast to FFN          | [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc] | [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req] and [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc] |
| Unicast to LFN            | N/A                     | [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]     |
| Unicast PAN Advert to LFN | N/A                     | [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]     |
| Broadcast to LFN          | N/A                     | [`SET_FHSS_LFN_BC`][bc-lfn] |

> | Asynchronous              | N/A                     | [`SET_FHSS_ASYNC`][async]   |

Reviewer 5: - Maybe it makes sense to repeat "location of parameter" in the columns headers.
 - Does "Reception" of "Unicast to FFN" makes sense?
 
Maybe:
```
|  FHSS type                   | Location of FHSS parameters |
|------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Rx Unicast                   | [`SET_FHSS_UC`][uc]         |
| Rx Broadcast                 | [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc]     |
| Tx Unicast to FFN            | [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]     |
| Tx Broadcast to FFN          | [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req] and [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc] |
| Tx Unicast to LFN            | [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]     |
| Tx Unicast PAN Advert to LFN | [`REQ_DATA_TX`][tx-req]     |
| Tx Broadcast to LFN          | [`SET_FHSS_LFN_BC`][bc-lfn] |
| Tx Asynchronous              | [`SET_FHSS_ASYNC`][async]   |
```

 - `uint16_t bsi`  
    LFN broadcast Schedule ID (from LBS-IE).

 - `struct chan_seq`  
   [Channel sequence][chan-seq] description.

> [!WARNING]
> The current RCP implementation uses the same set of parameters for FFN and
> LFN brodcast channel sequences. Thus, [`SET_FHSS_FFN_BC`][bc] and
> [`SET_FHSS_LFN_BC`][bc-lfn] override each other's channel sequence. The other
> parameters are distinct.

> [!NOTE]
> The host is responsible for periodically sending LFN Time Sync frames in
> order to maintain broadcast timing in LFN children.

### `0x33 SET_FHSS_ASYNC`

Configure asynchronous transmissions for network discovery.

 - `uint32_t tx_duration`  
    Maximum number of milliseconds the RCP is allowed to stay in continuous TX
    for an async transmission. If that duration is exceeded, the async
    transmission is split into chunks of that duration until all channels have
    been used. By default, the value is set to `0xffffffff`, which disables this
    feature.

  - `uint8_t chan_mask_len`  
     Number of bytes in the following channel mask.

  - `uint8_t chan_mask[]`  
     Bitmask of channels to use for transmission. See the same field in

>      ["Channel sequence"][chan-seq] for more details.

Reviewer 5: `SET_FHSS_ASYNC` do not use a `struct chan_seq`?

Author: No, there's no such thing as a channel function for async.

## Packet Filtering

Filter out received packets in the RCP to prevent unecessary
[`IND_DATA_RX`](#0x13-ind_data_rx) indications.

### `0x58 SET_FILTER_PANID`

Refuse frames with an explicit PAN ID different from this value. By default,
the value is set to `0xffff` which disables the filter.

 - `uint16_t pan_id`  

### `0x5A SET_FILTER_SRC64`

Refuse frames based on the source address. This should only be used in specific
testing scenarios to force network topologies. By default, the address list is

> empty.

Reviewer 5: I believe there are frame with unknown source address in the 15.4 standard (at least they exist in 802.11). I assume they are are not filtered?

Author: These frames are currently always refused by the RCP frame parser (they are not used in Wi-SUN). I should probably add some more details as to what is accepted in `REQ_DATA_TX` and `IND_DATA_RX`, similar to the short paragraph about the auxiliary security header.
